Online book: https://repository.unikom.ac.id/48769/1/Compilers%20-%20Principles%2C%20Techniques%2C%20and%20Tools%20%282006%29.pdf

## Ch02 A simple syntax-directed translator

The "context-free grammar" or BNF (Backus-Naur Form), is used to specify the syntax of a language.


### Definition of grammers

A context-free grammar has four components:

1. A set of terminal symbols, sometimes referred to as "tokens."

2. A set of nonterminals, sometimes called "s"yntactic variables." Each nonterminal represents a set of strings of terminals.

3. A set of productions, where each production consists of a nonterminal, called the head or left side of the production, an arrow, and a sequence of terminals and/or nonterminals, called the body or right side of the production.

4. A designation of one of the nonterminals as the start symbol.

e.g. 4 productions:

```
list -> list + digit (2.1)
list -> list - digit (2.2)
list -> digit (2.3)
digit -> 0 | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7 | 8 | 9 (2.4)

```


## Ch04 Syntax analysis

Syntax analyzer or Parser, obtains a string of tokens from the lexical analyzer, and verifies that the string of token names can be generated by the grammar for the source language.

The parser constructs a parse tree and passes it to the rest of the compiler for further processing.


### Top-down vs bottom-up method

Top-down methods build parse trees from the top (root) to the bottom (leaves), while bottom-up methods start from the leaves and work their way up to the root.

In either case, the input to the parser is scanned from left to right, one symbol at a time.

LL and LR grammars are expressive enough to describe most of the syntactic constructs in modern programming languages. Parsers implemented by hand often use LL grammers, e.g. the predictive-parsing approach of Sec. 2.4.2. Parsers for the larger class of LR grammars are usually constructed using automated tools.

Top-down and bottom-up methods work well for LL and LR grammers.

## Derivations

To construct a parse tree, beginning with the start symbol, each rewriting step replaces a nonterminal by the body of one of its productions.

e.g.

For grammer: E -> -E | (E) | id


```
E => -E => -(E) => -(id)
```

We call such a sequence of replacements a derivation of -(id) from E.

### Ambiguity

An ambiguous grammar is one that produces more than one leftmost derivation or more than one rightmost derivation for the same sentence.


### Lexical Versus Syntactic Analysis

Regular expressions are most useful for describing the structure of constructs such as identiers, constants, keywords, and white space.

Grammars are most useful for describing nested structures such as balanced parentheses, matching begin-end's, corresponding if-then-else's, and so on. These nested structures cannot be described by regular expressions.
